[Music]
The name of the game in American
capitalism, especially American
financial capitalism, is being big, and
no one is bigger on Wall Street than JP
Morgan Chase.
How big is it?
With a $4.6 trillion balance it holds
around 20% of all the money in the US
banking system. JP Morgan is more
valuable than its three biggest rivals
combined.
Last year JP Morgan earned the highest
profit in the history of American
banking. They became the only bank to
ever crack 50 billion in profit.
There are a few different ways that you
can measure a bank's success. You can
look at profit, market value, asset
size, but there's also staying power.
There is essentially no figure in the
history of modern finance who has won
power and kept it like Jamie Dimon.
Jamie Dimon's a great banker. I think
he's been the head of JP Morgan for 17
years, something like that.
This country is a lot better off because
Jamie Dimon has been running JP Morgan.
But the success of Jamie Dimon and JP
Morgan casts a long shadow. When you
think about it, it's more of a question
mark than an exclamation point. What is
going to happen to this gigantic bank
after its long-time CEO leaves? No one
really knows.
[Music]
For 20 years Dimon has led JP Morgan's
ascent of Wall Street. It's financial
dominance that manifests itself like
this, its new headquarters on Park
Avenue.
JP Morgan is about to get essentially
its own little mini neighborhood, a kind
of Jamie Dimonville, if you will. This
was a labor of love to have a physical
embodiment which represents our company
JP Morgan has something like 17,000
employees in New York City, making it
one of the city's largest private
employers. So, they have their new
building which will hold about 10,000 of
them. Then you look across the street to
383 Madison, that's the old Bear Stearns
headquarters, and then they bought 250
Park. And despite his noted opinions on
work from home And don't give me the
that work from home Friday works.
People join JP Morgan because they want
to work for Jamie Dimon, this legendary
CEO, dean of Wall Street. He just wants
his people in his organization to be the
best, and so he brings his A game, and
he expects the people around him to do
the same.
All of this adds to the Dimon aura,
unfaltering Wall Street confidence mixed
with at times unpredictable candor. That
is potentially catastrophic. That
hurricane is right out there down the
road coming our way. You know, I should
probably shouldn't say this, but when
you see one cockroach, there's probably
more. He just says what he thinks.
Absolutely not, and that would be the
road to hell for America.
Over the years as Jamie Dimon has
evolved into this more statesman-like
role that he's taken atop the the
finance industry, he wades further and
further into policy and things that
aren't directly touching banking.
[Music]
Jamie Dimon had a long-running joke that
he would be there five more years, no
matter when asked. I you know, I love
what I do.
He is 69 years old. He's had a couple
health issues over the years, including
throat cancer more than a decade ago,
and more recently a heart issue in 2020.
And JP Morgan actually had to appoint
temporary co-CEOs while he recovered.
Though he keeps coming back for more,
eventually he will retire. But when and
who will fill his shoes is anyone's
guess. There have been some iterations
of potential successors that have ended
up all leaving to go take, you know,
another big job or leaving to retire.
The three current likeliest contenders
to take over for Jamie Dimon when he
eventually retires are Troy Rohrbaugh
and Doug Petno who run the commercial
and investment bank, and Marianne Lake
who runs the consumer and community
bank. But they're the latest in a series
of likely contenders, and there are
always more coming up the chain at JP
Morgan.
At the same time, for JP Morgan
investors, there really is this Jamie
Dimon premium where they're most
interested in more Jamie.
Historically, this sort of cult of
personality in business is often called
the key man risk. Where would Amazon be
without Bezos? Or Tesla without Musk? So
too is Dimon to JP Morgan. While it's
certainly true that Jamie Dimon's tenure
atop JP Morgan overall has been very
successful by a lot of measures, it
hasn't been all rainbows and
butterflies. For example, in 2012 there
was a $6 billion trading loss called the
London Whale. Jamie was called to
testify in front of Congress a couple
times. Some cases he actually thrived in
the congressional hearings. He had some
lawmakers asking him for advice on the
economy. I would like to come away from
the hearing today with some ideas on
what you think we we need to do, what we
maybe need to take apart that we've
already done. Another episode involved
the acquisition of Frank, a financial
planning platform for students that led
to its founder being convicted of
defrauding the bank. But when all is
said and done, they paid 175 million for
it, which amounted to 3 hours of revenue
that year. So, that's a great example of
how these kind of missteps become more
embarrassments than anything else.
JP Morgan has been able to survive these
missteps, whether big or small, because
of its fortress balance sheet.
>> Fortress Dimon is always about the
balance sheet. Fortress balance sheet is
a term that Jamie Dimon has been using
throughout his entire career. It's
constant stress test. It's looking
across the range from best possible
outcome to worst possible outcome, and
making sure that JP Morgan can weather
that storm. When you think about risk,
think about
things that can go terribly wrong, can
you survive them?
Still, when it comes to the government's
annual stress tests and other
regulations JP Morgan is subject to,
Dimon is a critic. There are a lot of
rules that Jamie Dimon does not like.
It's just more regulations and more
rules and more requirements. One of his
governing principles on the topic of
regulation is that it should not be so
complicated. He has his famous spaghetti
chart, which is a graph of all the
overlapping regulators that JP Morgan
deals with, and he often will carry
around a paper version of that,
especially when he's in DC.
But despite all the regulations,
government hasn't kept the bank from
growing. We can look at the financial
crisis when much of the building blocks
of the modern JP Morgan were built. JP
Morgan rescued Bear Stearns, which gave
them a far larger trading business. They
scooped up Washington Mutual after it
failed. So, the JP Morgan that came out
of the Great Financial Crisis was a much
different, much larger JP Morgan than
the one going in. Are you too big to
fail?
I don't know what that word means
anymore. One irony of the global
financial crisis is that the thing that
we associate it with, being too big to
fail, ended up resulting in a landscape
where the biggest banks got even bigger.
At the time Jamie Dimon had only been
CEO of JP Morgan for a couple years, but
he did warn about the excesses in
subprime mortgage lending in an annual
letter to shareholders. Looking back at
that letter now, he was clearly right. A
year ago we were worried about banks
that were too big to fail,
but in the last year big banks have
gotten bigger. It is sort of the tragic
failure about the regime we came in
with.
For all the unrest, the regime would
remain largely unchanged. Years later,
JP Morgan would benefit from a crisis
yet again in a government-led deal.
US is pushing First Republic to be
rescued with banks after the stock
slump.
First Republic was a regional bank based
in California that really focused on
serving wealthy clients until it failed
in 2023. The United States government
literally had rules on the book to stop
JP Morgan from getting an even bigger
portion of deposits in this country. And
then, when First Republic got in
trouble, that same government allowed JP
Morgan to buy it. First Republic will
now be taken over by JP Morgan. Between
that and Silicon Valley Bank's failure
paves the way for JP Morgan to dial up
their desire to be the go-to bank for
the venture capitalists and startup
ecosystem.
The bank also constantly assesses the
competitive landscape. What is Block
doing? What is Citadel Securities doing?
What is Apple doing? And really, you
know, try to make sure that someone like
Apple doesn't come in and eat their
lunch.
Because JP Morgan is pretty much
everywhere, Dimon's successor will
inherit not only the firm's vast empire,
but a pivotal role in the stability of
the US and global economy. You think
about the fortress balance sheet concept
and practically what that's meant for JP
Morgan and Jamie Dimon over time, and
it's JP Morgan constantly emerging
bigger and stronger from crises that
have taken other firms down.
The rules of Wall Street, informally
speaking, are to make as much money as
you can legally, and to lose money as
infrequently as possible. JP Morgan has
been very, very good at that playbook.
[Music]
Mhm.